---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-03-29T13:43:02.643Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-29T13:42:42.032Z'
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
title: ''
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-29-ef8160d0-93f6-4f50-aeb1-0b4d33787dd7.md
published: true
url: ef8160d0-93f6-4f50-aeb1-0b4d33787dd7/index.html
_type: Article

---
_"We have always lived off the splendour of the subject and the poverty of the object. It is the subject that makes history, it's the subject that totalises the world. \[...\] But everything is inverted if one passes on to the thought of seduction. There, it's no longer the subject which desires, it's the object which seduces. Everything comes from the object and everything returns to it, just as everything started with seduction, not desire. \[...\] It is the mirror. It is that which returns the subject to its mortal transparency. So if it can fascinate or seduce the subject, it is because it radiates no substance or meaning of its own. The pure object is sovereign, because it is what breaks up the sovereignty of the other and catches it in its own trap." (Baudrillard 1990)_  
So states Jean Baudrillard in Fatal Strategies. It prompts the question: what is the contemporary strategy of the object in the face of our increasing fetishisation of virtualisation, a brave new world that seeks only the charm of its own illusion, or the realer than the real? Is it not the return of the sublime in a sleek new form, an alien exaltation that seeks to seduce the subject -- to ensnare the viewer in an aesthetic engorgement, our every sense and trait "raised to the superlative power \[...\] Imagine the true that has absorbed all the energy of the false: that's simulation." (Baudrillard 1990) The contemporary soul is oversaturated, easily stupefied. Žižek muses: "What if we are 'really alive' only if we commit ourselves with an excessive intensity which puts us beyond 'mere life'?" (Žižek 2001, p.36) In a dopamine-addicted world of throbbing lights and fast-growing technologies, our eyes are no longer so easily impressed. Only the sublime still exists, emerging demurely back into fashion but donning a new shell: the mask of seduction. "Seduction is a phenomenon; it is also a process, a strategy." (Laura Gonzalez) This strategy is one of illusion, of trickery, of magic. Seduction is the strategy of disappearance, and the object is its impassive conspirator, manipulated by the increasingly ambiguous intentions of the creator: "Today, the object is no longer 'functional' in the traditional meaning of the word; it no longer serves, it tests you." (Baudrillard 1983, p. 12) I would contest, however, that it is equally the contemporary subject that tests the object: only once it seduces us, enchanting our sight and deceiving our minds, do we believe it deserves to be understood or even simply to be gazed upon. This supposition leads to an impasse where the object reigns and the subject expects. "Illusion is not false, for it doesn't use false signs; it uses senseless signs, signs that point nowhere. This is why it deceives and disappoints our demand for meaning, but it does so enchantingly." (Baudrillard 1983, p. 52)

The root of seduction lies in the sublime. The Kantian Sublime can be incorporated in this contemporary context insofar as we are discussing the elevation of an experience from merely beautiful to the inexplicable. But we have metamorphosed beyond that, beyond the Romantic topos of the sublime when artists such as C.D. Friedrich paid homage to the incomprehensibility of nature in works such as Sea of Ice, frozen ironically in the rigor mortis of a transient moment in time. Clemens and Pettman argue in Avoiding the Subject: Media, Culture and the Object that "experience is no longer regulated by 'faculties' (whether psychological, logical, formal, or otherwise); Kant's careful discriminations between sensibility, imagination, understanding and reason, as well as his related divisions \[...\] are essentially meaningless. The virtual objects of aesthetics are today as real as it gets." (p. 17) But what is the real? The simulated replica becomes, in its own right, an original model. Take Ed Atkin's video installation work Us Dead Talk Love, where two simulated 3D models of his head espouse his own personal thoughts: the very duplication renders both the copy and the original as artificial, in essence becoming originals -- what Baudrillard calls the precession of simulacra. "It is now impossible to isolate the process of the real, or to prove the real." (Baudrillard p. 41) Today we are no longer asking what reality is, only what appears to be real or meaningful through its (often) interactive experience: "we should not mistake reality for fiction -- we should be able to discern, in what we experience as fiction, the hard kernel of the Real which we are able to sustain only if we fictionalise it." (Slavoj Žižek 2001, p. 19)

Or is the sublime still divine? I refer to eco-artists such as Mariko Mori, who works with cutting-edge technology, creating alien forms and landscapes in film and sculpture, and yet, as expounded in a recent Chelsea College lecture that she gave, still postulates Kantian notions of the sublime as associated with the appreciation of nature. Her objects on show in the Royal Academy Rebirth exhibition, such as Tom Na H-iu II, "mirror the \[cosmic\] sky on the earth", a juxtaposition of the celestial and terrestrial that undoubtedly has connotations with the heavenly, and she sees them as a "flag" that directs the subject's attention to the environment and ultimately reflects it. Despite these traditional connotations (particularly her strong references to the Jomon period) her work has an alien surreal feel, a hyperreal rawness amplified by the recherché material and the ethereal play of light as interpreted by supernova neutrinos, translated by the Super-Kamiokande. To the viewer, these esoteric scientific details might as well be from another world -- or even Mori herself as she was performing in the 1990's, dressed in a futuristically romantic notion of the cyborg-ic alien or elevated to goddess-status in Nirvana. What is essential, and elaborated, in Mori's work is the constant reference of the sublime: the use of sublime, technologically created material in order to create a sublime object that mirrors the sublime environment. "The auratic object represents more than just a useful or (fleetingly) desirable object, but an opaque doorway to 'something else.' Something seductive and beckoning, both intimate and aloof \[...\] Something beyond the boring, everyday world, yet at once immured within it. An alien trophy or souvenir. Or even an ambassador from another time, another space, another -- less alienated, more considered and selective -- way of being." (Clemens and Pettman, p. 14) The subject is ensnared by the play of light and seduced by the mystery of the object's very origin, the re-birth of its simulated genesis.

It is not so curious that just as we still seek the sublime, so we look to the new frontier to fulfill it: scientific technology, oftentimes, fulfills this prescription. We are post modern, post-postmodern, having arrived uncertainly in a Metamodernist age, whose own loose definition is one rooted in oscillation -- vacillating between "a yearning for universal truths on the one hand and political relativism on the other, between hope and doubt, sincerity and irony, knowingness and naivety, construction and deconstruction." (Van den Akker and Vermeulen, 2010) Cue the emergence of the New Aesthetic: composed in 2011 of a multi-authored Tumblr feed that "set out to document evidence of the increasingly symbiotic relationship between man and machine, revelling in the often-unexpected beauty that arises when the human-digital divide is ruptured. A cornucopia of glitches, pixelations, render ghosts, face recognition failures, GPS anomalies and countless other digital artefacts serve to introduce novel visual forms, beguiling us with their strange, alien allure." (James Bridle 2011) Since then, blogs such as The Gnu Aesthetic and New-Aesthetic.tumblr.com have attempted to collect research and data that allow us to organise and perceive a new way of seeing: the perspective of the inorganic, the thing. The New Aesthetic is not something that can be done, but is "a series of artefacts of the heterogeneous network, which recognises differences, the gaps in our overlapping but distant realities." (James Bridle 2011) Again, it is no longer what is real that is important, but the kernel of the real, or more often: the void.

Take Utopia, the recent acclaimed new television series revolving around a group of somewhat hapless young people arrested in the bloody waters of an international conspiracy. The real victims are the show's viewers, the watchers eager for the plot to divulge its secrets but equally unwilling for it to ever actually occur: "the trapper is God, or the fates, the trapped animal is man in his tragic incarnation" (Alfred Gell, p. 29) The show survives on a perpetual edge of anticipation, a suspended suspense that lets it keep its enigmatic façade. After all, "what could be more seductive than the secret? \[...\] Just as seduction challenges the order of production, so the secret challenges the order of truth and knowledge." (Baudrillard 2012, p. 64) The subject is you, but the object is the secret. The actual plot is of secondary significance, one that revolves around the object as its real locus of focus: the mystifying Mr. Rabbit, the mysterious 'L', personified in the Utopia comics as a queer animal-deity, his true identity hidden behind the flesh of the inhuman. Not unlike D'joan, the dog-girl as described by Cordwainer Smith in his short story The Dead Lady of Clown Town (The Rediscovery of Man), in which her sublime transcendence as a goddess-like icon leads to her tragic murder/vanishing (Joan of Arc, ashes to ashes) but also instigates the eventual emancipation of the underpeople. "The power of metamorphosis is at the root of all seduction, including the most shifting forms of substitution: those of faces, roles and masks", Baudrillard declares, and, poignantly, "to disappear is to disperse oneself in appearances." (p. 46-7)

Cue the Disappearing Into One exhibition at the Zabludowicz Collection. A curatorial collaboration between Chelsea College of Art and Goldsmiths curating students, the show "acts as a meditation on the magical and transcendent potential of art, reflecting the return to a romantic sensibility that has surfaced in recent times." (Luke Turner 2013). Turner himself is an artist and strong proponent of the metamodernist movement, as the one who asserted the self-claimed 'manifesto' of Metamodernism, and writes a series of intriguing articles on Notes on Metamodernism \[ metamodernism.org \], including an article on the Zabludowicz exhibition itself. Set in a converted Methodist chapel, the hushed auditorium-like space one finds oneself in immediately upon opening the door sets the stage for disappearance. The works themselves are an eclectic, multifarious mix that ranges from the mundane -- plastic bag hung vacantly on a pole -- to the perhaps unintentionally comedic -- Laura Buckley's twin-screen film, Shields, featuring apoplectic variations of macro textures, jewels and colours blooming across the screen... and also the subject's own reflections, varyingly large and micro silhouettes that exaggerate and distort our perceptions of space. Or even the secretive: take Susan Collis' White Lies, encompassing a modest stepladder in the middle of an ultraviolet room of cloth and cling film: unremarkable, at first, till we discover the mother of pearl and other precious jewels inlaid into the wood, artfully disguised as paint drips and splatters. The romantic sublime returns but in a new form of seduction.

The quintessential example of this is the film work of Guido van der Werve: Nummer Vier, I don't want to get involved in this, I don't want to be a part of this, talk me out of it. A plane flies determinedly in the vast emptiness of the sky, proclaiming _"IT WAS NOT ENOUGH"_; the artist plays on a mirrored, ripple-less lake Chopin's Nocturne in B-flat minor, the mountains reflected in the cloud-lit surface; a guided boat with a practiced choir approaches slowly from the distance, an excruciating slowness that challenges the subject's patience -- until, finally, nothing will happen, one feels -- but then without warning, the artist drops from the sky, an Arkansas blackbird in all its (his) inexplicable dive downwards, into the lake and disappearing from view. It is a magic trick: "Modern art exerts only the magic of its disappearance" (Baudrillard 2012, p. 34), a trick that aims towards the subliminal sublime. Turner references Novalis, author and philosopher of early German Romanticism, categorising the exhibited works as "indeterminate art, free, unmediated \[...\] realising pure ideas \[...\] a self-enjoyment of the spirit." (Novalis 1997, p. 77, quoted from Turner) Art that only exerts the magic of its appearance, and thus its disappearance: quale that leads us to a metamodernist sublime.

It is a qualia that the object exudes in order to seduce the subject. The subject anticipates and the object provokes: "Challenge, and not desire, lies at the heart of seduction. Challenge is that to which one cannot avoid responding, while one can choose not to respond to desire." (Baudrillard 2012, p. 57) The object's grand design is to seduce the subject into a sublime disappearance: a machination of vanishing that is both fatalistic and liberating. "Beyond space, rituals and relationships, deduction emerges from the object, whether in the form of analyst (for the analysand) or an artefact (for the viewer). The question is: how can objects lead someone astray?" (Laura Gonzalez) Perhaps the answer is through a romanticised, but not Romantic, sublime: a return to the enchantment of yearning, of seduction, of the clandestine: the object operating sub rosa, hiding itself furtively in new technologies and new ways of seeing to form a new perspective. The object mirrors our uncertainty, challenging us as subjects to question the position of our position, to fathom the way to move forward in our digital age, and what it means to move forward -- or, simply, what it means to mean at all.